A couple of weeks ago, we looked at Genesis 17, verse number one.
Last week, we observed the Lord's Supper, and I preached from 1 Corinthians 11.
But two weeks ago, our last study in the book of Genesis, we were here in Genesis 17, and
we noted the way in which the Lord appeared to Abram and really focused in that message
on the significance of the name El Shaddai.
In verse number one of Genesis 17, the Bible says, when Abram was 90 years old and nine,
the Lord appeared to Abram and said unto him, I am the Almighty God.
Walk before me and be thou perfect.
And we mentioned what God declared and then what God demanded, and El Shaddai is the Hebrew
of the Almighty God.
And what a blessing to see and to note just the significance of who God is and to know
the Lord God Almighty.
And as you look in the passage of Scripture, it's interesting to note the posture of Abram.
According to verse number three, the Bible says, and Abram fell on his face.
And Abram fell on his face.
It's interesting if you study through the Word of God and you see those that have had
opportunities to interact with God direct, you find that they would fall upon their face
and worship before the holiness of our God.
And what a blessing to understand that God was seeking to communicate truth to Abram
with regard to who He is.
As you read through this passage of Scripture in Genesis 17, you will note the declarative
statements of Almighty God.
I will is mentioned often as God is speaking to Abram.
And it's interesting as we would note that God first told Abraham who He is and then
revealed to Abraham what He would do.
And when we know who God is, it goes a long way in trusting what He says He will do.
And He says, I am the Lord God Almighty, and then He says, I will do these things.
I will bring these things to pass.
And so God reveals first to Abraham who He is, and then He will declare and reveal to
Abraham the things that He will do.
You understand that as we look in the Word of God, as we study through the pages of Scripture,
and as we find that God has revealed Himself to us, and He's used throughout the Old Testament
in particular a number of names that would help us to understand certain aspects about
the character and nature of God.
And as we are mindful of those things, it helps us to understand that He indeed is able
to do all things, that nothing, nothing is too hard for our God.
And I'm so just thankful and overwhelmed with joy that God Almighty would reveal Himself
to us.
And then that we, because of the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, can have a relationship
with the God of the universe, and that He's interested in our lives.
And as we look at Abraham here, and we look at all that's going on, and we understand
that here God is going to once again discuss various aspects of the covenant.
We'd understand that this is not a new covenant, rather a reaffirmation of the covenant that
we've already discussed and studied.
You go back to Genesis chapter number 12 and Genesis chapter number 15, and you find that
it's there in those passages of Scripture that you find many details with regard to
what we often refer to as the Abrahamic covenant.
Here again you'll find many aspects of that truth being revealed to us in Genesis 17.
Note with me in verse number 5, the Bible says,
"...neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham.
For a father of many nations have I made thee."
I've titled the message this evening, Thy Name Shall Be Abraham.
The name Abram means exalted father, but the name Abraham means father of multitudes.
Exalted father, Abram, Abraham, father of multitudes.
As we look at the passage of Scripture, I want you to note, first of all, the plan.
In verses 2 through 16, God is speaking to Abraham, and we find that he begins, and we
find that it says that he appeared to Abram in verse number 1, and he says in verse number
2, "...and I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.
And Abram fell on his face, and God talked with him, saying..."
Now notice as we look at these next few verses, the plan of God that is being once again spoken
to Abraham with regard to these things that would come to pass with regard to this covenant
that God is making with Abraham, and we find the first aspect of what God will deal with
is the seed.
We focused on this as we've studied in Genesis 12 and in Genesis 15, but you notice that
the Bible says this in verse number 4, "...as for me, behold, my covenant is with thee,
and thou shalt be a father of many nations.
Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham.
For a father of many nations have I made thee, and I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and
I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.
And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their
generations."
Notice, "...for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after
thee."
We tend to think about the plan that God is revealing to Abraham, and we understand the
seed that is referenced, and we'd say this as we look at this portion of Scripture, there's
one aspect with regard to the physical or natural seed, the descendants of Abraham,
if you will, and we'd understand that here in this passage, and of course in a few chapters
in the book of Genesis, the record is given to us with regard to the birth of Isaac, the
result of Abraham and Sarah, and of course Isaac would be born, and the natural descendant,
the physical descendant of Abraham.
Of course we're familiar, as we've studied in previous passages of Scripture, there in
chapter number 16, with regard to Abraham and Hagar, and the birth of Ishmael.
And then we're also mindful that in Genesis chapter number 25, the Bible tells us that
Abraham took Ketorah to be his wife.
The Bible tells us that there are six sons that are born of Abraham and Ketorah there
in Genesis chapter number 25.
And so we'd understand physical or natural descendants of Abraham, as we'd find here
in this passage of Scripture, and of course the focus of Scripture, just as we mentioned
after the Tower of Babel, and how that God zooms in upon Abraham, Abram at the time,
and how that God will focus in upon the lineage of the Lord Jesus Christ, and we'll see that
to be the case also with regard to the birth of Isaac.
We find, however, that more than just speaking of a physical or natural seed or descendants,
that God has revealed to us through His Word the spiritual seed, or the spiritual descendants.
We understand when we speak about the seed, if you turn to the book of Galatians and hold
your place there, that there is the physical, but there's also the spiritual aspect.
In Galatians chapter number 3, when God is giving us truth here, as Paul is relaying
these powerful truths to the believers in the region of Galatia, he says this in verse
number 16, "'Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made.
He saith not, and to seeds, plural, as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed, which
is Christ.'"
So, again, as we look at the lineage of the Lord Jesus Christ throughout Scripture, and
again, the zooming in of God upon the line of Abraham after the Tower of Babel, and then
zooming in further upon that of Isaac, of course, the descendants of Isaac, of course,
going through Israel there, and His Twelve, and so on and so forth.
And so we would find how that the lens of Scripture will focus upon the lineage of the
Lord Jesus Christ.
It is interesting, however, to note in the same passage of Scripture in Galatians 3,
the Bible says this in verse number 7, "'Know ye therefore that they which are of faith,
the same are the children of Abraham.'
And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached
before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed.
So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham.'"
And I'm thankful for the truth of the New Testament with regard to this spiritual descendant,
if you will, or descendants, those that have come to the knowledge of the truth of the
gospel, and those which are of faith are the same, the same are the children of Abraham.
We'd find that all mankind needs to be redeemed, that there are but two categories of people
in our world.
There are those that have been born again, those that are saved, and there are those
that are yet to be born again, those who are lost.
And we'd find that all come by the way of the cross, and it does not matter what your
heritage or lineage is, it does not matter where you grew up or what your parents were.
God, as one preacher said, has no grandchildren.
He only has children.
And I'm thankful for the truth that God gives us, and we think about the plan of God being
revealed and the seed that is mentioned in verses 2-7, again back in Genesis 17, in verse
8, we'll find the focus now shifts to the land, to the land, and this again is truth
been revealed to us already in Genesis 12 and 15, again, the reaffirmation of this covenant.
Verse number 8, it says,
Now I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger,
all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession, and I will be their God.
So God, once again, as He's giving this plan to Abraham, as He's speaking to Abraham, the
Bible says that God talked with him, and Abraham, his posture is that he fell on his face, and
Abraham is receiving this instruction from God, and God reminds him about the seed.
He reminds him about the land, and then we find that in verses 9 through 14, God gives
and explains to Abraham the token of the covenant, that of circumcision.
Notice in verse number 9, the Bible says,
And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou and thy seed after
thee in their generations.
This is my covenant which ye shall keep.
And me and you, and thy seed after thee, every man child among you shall be circumcised.
And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the covenant
betwixt me and you.
And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations,
he that is born in the house or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy
seed.
And he that is born in thy house and he that is bought with thy money must needs be circumcised,
and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.
And the uncircumcised, verse 14, man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised,
that soul shall be cut off from his people, he hath broken my covenant.
As we begin to see this truth that is given here in verses 9 through 14, the token of
the covenant, you see that word used specifically that it's a token of the covenant betwixt
me and you.
And that word, it really carries with it the idea of the sign, the covenant is given, this
token of the covenant, the sign.
The Bible tells us who, every man child, according to verse number 10.
Again, according to verse number 12, the Bible says every man child shall be circumcised
among you.
Why?
Because it was a token.
It was a sign of the covenant.
And when?
The Bible tells us specifically in verse number 12, and he that is eight days old.
And so the Bible answers for Abraham very specifically who it is, why it is, and when
it shall be done.
We find that disobedience resulted in being cast out according to verse number 14.
And we find that so as we look at this truth of what God is giving to Abraham with regard
to the token of the covenant has many times been misunderstood throughout history.
And what I mean by that is you'll find that even there in Acts chapter number 15, when
they had the council at Jerusalem, there were those that were saying of the Jews that unless
you're circumcised after the manner of Moses, you cannot be saved.
And so we find that this token of the covenant of circumcision, it did not, it was not something
that Abraham did that caused him to be righteous before God.
Notice with me in Romans chapter number 4, look at a couple of passages in the New Testament,
if you will.
In Romans chapter number 4, and we've visited this passage of Scripture in the past, but
I want you to notice that in Romans chapter number 4, in verse number 3, Paul is referring
to an event that took place in the life of Abram in Genesis chapter number 15, well before
the token of the covenant, that of circumcision, was ever explained to Abram.
We find here in Romans chapter number 4, in verse number 3, the Bible says,
For what sayeth the Scripture, Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness.
Again as we've studied, and I made note of this in Genesis chapter number 15, when God
was speaking with Abram and that discussion is taking place, and Abram had mentioned about
one born in his house was an heir, and it says that God reconfirms for him the promise,
and it says he believed in the Lord and he counted it to him for righteousness in Genesis
15 in verse number 6.
Again in Galatians 3, stay here in the book of Romans, but in Galatians 3 in verse number
6, Paul refers to this same event that we just mentioned in Genesis 15, where the Bible
says in Galatians 3 and 6, even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him
for righteousness.
Again, that event in Genesis 15 predates the communication between God and Abraham that
we're studying in Genesis 17 with regard to the token of the covenant, that of circumcision.
Look back in Romans 4 and look down at verse number 9, if you will.
The Bible says this, "...cometh this blessedness then upon the circumcision only, or upon the
uncircumcision also?
For we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness."
How was it then reckoned?
When he was in circumcision or in uncircumcision?
Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.
Why?
Again, Genesis 15 versus Genesis 17, the chronological order of these events in the life of Abraham,
and again in verse number 11 it says, "...and he received the sign of circumcision, a seal
of the righteousness of the faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised, that he might
be the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that righteousness
might be imputed unto them also."
Paul, of course, as I mentioned already, the event in Acts chapter number 15, he dealt
with it quite extensively in the book of Galatians, and we find that Paul would summarize it this
way in the book of Galatians, and he would say, "...for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature."
Of course, we're familiar with the passage of Scripture in 2 Corinthians 5 when Paul
also was used by the Lord to append those words, "...if any man be in Christ, he is
a new creature.
Old things are passed away, behold, all things are become new."
And so we find that Paul says, listen, "...circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but
a new creature."
These folks that were saying, running around saying, you had to be circumcised in order
to be saved.
No, salvation is through the work of Christ at Calvary.
The truth of circumcision back in the book of Genesis with Abraham is with regard to
the token or the sign of the covenant.
He believed God in chapter number 15, and it was counted, imputed to him for righteousness.
So we see the plan back in Genesis chapter number 17.
Notice with me the plea.
In verse 17, well, let me continue reading.
In verse number 14, we read about those that disobeyed and did not follow in circumcision
and the consequence.
In verse 15, "...and God said unto Abraham, Ask for Sarai thy wife.
Thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be.
And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her, yea, I will bless her, and she
shall be a mother of nations.
Nations of people shall be of her."
So we find that God gave the plan.
He spoke to Abraham about the seed, about the land.
He changed Abram's name from Abram to Abraham.
He changed Sarai's name from Sarai to Sarah.
He gave him the token of the covenant, that of circumcision.
And we find that God is, once again, interested in communicating to Abraham the plan.
Now it's interesting to note, you could ask the question, why is it that God is rehearsing
these things?
Had God not already told Abraham that these things would happen?
Absolutely.
But there were some things that happened between Genesis 12, 15, and 17, and one of the most
significant things that happened is what's recorded in chapter number 16 with the birth
of Ishmael.
And we find that, as we've mentioned, that God has given to Abraham this promise all
the way back in Genesis chapter number 12 about a seed, and yet now as we look at the
passage in which we're in, remember, at the close of Genesis chapter number 16 until the
beginning, the opening of Genesis chapter number 17, 13 years pass.
Now 13 years is a long time.
He was 86 when Ishmael was born, and he's 99 in verse number 1 when the Lord appears
to him.
Thirteen years.
It's a lengthy period of time.
So God is reaffirming that which He had promised, and we see the plan.
Notice the plea.
Verse 17, "'Then Abraham fell upon his face and laughed and said in his heart, Shall
a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old, and shall Sarah that is ninety
years old bear?'
Notice what Abraham says in verse 18, "'And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might
live before thee.'"
There's much division perhaps is a good word, disagreement maybe is a better word actually.
There's much disagreement amongst theologians with regard to Abraham laughing here in Genesis
chapter number 17.
There are some that will say that Abraham laughed out of joy.
Yet, as you look at verse number 18 and you see what Abraham says, others would say that
he was laughing out of doubt.
You find that he says, he asks the question, shall a child, in verse 17, be born unto him
that is a hundred years old, and shall Sarah that is ninety years old bear?
And Abraham said, oh, that Ishmael might live before thee.
Ishmael's now thirteen years old.
Ishmael's the son of Abraham.
No doubt, as you'd understand Hebrew custom, he's now nearing the age of being a man.
You'd find that Abraham is now pleading with, or making this plea before God.
Twenty-four years has passed from the promise initially being given in Genesis chapter number
twelve.
I mentioned that thirteen years is a long time, twenty-four years is even longer.
Almost twice as long.
In Genesis chapter number twelve, the Bible tells us in verse number four, well let me
just say this, in verse number one, it says that the Lord had said unto Abram, get thee
out of thy country, from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that
I will show thee, and I will make of thee a great nation.
I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing.
Verse four, so Abram departed as the Lord had spoken unto him, and Lot went with him,
and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran.
He's seventy-five when God tells him that He's going to make of him a great nation.
And he's ninety-nine and he has no children.
Twenty-four years.
Remember, it was there in Genesis chapter number fifteen that Abram, again, is having
discussion with God, and as they're having this interaction, we know that God appears
to him and says to Abram, I am thy shield.
He says, fear not, Abram, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.
And then we find that Abram would say to God, behold, in verse number three of Genesis fifteen,
to me thou hast given no seed, and lo, one born in my house is mine heir.
No doubt what Abram was suggesting or presenting to God was his logical conclusion with regard
to the circumstances that he was facing.
We find that God, again, in His grace and His mercy, He gives the word of the Lord,
comes to Abram and says in verse number four, very clearly, this shall not be thine heir.
But he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.
You come to chapter number sixteen and another ten years has passed between the events that
we've read already up to this point, and we find that the event is recorded of the situation
with Hagar and the birth of Ishmael.
These twenty-four years have now passed and God is now speaking to Abraham and telling
Abraham that He's going to, again, give him a son and that a child shall be born.
And Abraham says, oh, that Ishmael might live before thee.
We see the response, if you will, the plea of Abraham in verses seventeen and eighteen.
We find that God graciously, once again, responds and we find the promises that are
given in verses nineteen through twenty-two.
You know, I'm so thankful that God is gracious and long-suffering with us.
I'm so thankful that God would repeat Himself.
Really it's kind of what He's doing with Abraham over and over here, is it not?
Over these last few chapters, the things that have evolved in the life of Abraham and the
things that he's dealt with in his own not being able to understand.
And sometimes, even as I've mentioned when we've studied through these passages of Scripture
and the length of time that has gone on, many of us can't wait just a few minutes on God,
let alone years.
Years.
I've heard stories of individuals that have prayed for years and years and years for a
loved one to be saved.
And their long-suffering and their persistence in prayer and how God would answer that prayer.
But honestly, this evening, most of us, waiting is not like our best attribute.
Most of us don't like to wait.
I mentioned as I was preaching a couple of weeks ago about that, the way in which they've
calculated how many years totaled up of minutes in your life you'll spend doing certain things
and I mentioned about you'll spend two years waiting in line.
And I said, for me, it's going to be longer because I always find the line that seems
to take the longest.
It just happened to me the other day, yesterday.
Where's Joseph?
He's back there.
We get in line at Walmart.
Joseph says, Daddy, this isn't a good line.
They're kind of slow here.
I know it's a speedy checkout, but they're not really speedy.
Isn't that what you told me?
That's what he said.
And I said, bud, there's only two people in front of us.
The one person's got half of his things taken care of already and this lady, she's only
got about four or five things.
He just had three things.
He said, Daddy, I'm telling you, we were here just the other day and it's not speedy.
And I said, but if we have to walk all the way down there, and we had to walk that way
to get out anyway, to go into the self-checkout line, I can see that there's a bunch of people
in line.
So, if we just wait, it'll be faster.
Wouldn't you know that the last item of that guy in front of us had no price number, no
barcode on it?
I mean, it's just the way it works.
I mean, do you know how much this is?
I said to Joseph, let's go, and we went walking all the way down there, you know?
I should have listened to him in the first place.
Waiting is something that most of us don't enjoy doing.
Abraham was waiting on God.
24 years, God had promised him a seed, a son, and yet there's no son with him and Sarah.
So God, once again, is going to give these promises.
Note, as we look at verses 19 through 22, note the clarity and the certainty.
I'm thankful that our God gives the clarity that Abraham needed.
And God said, verse 19,
Sarah, thy wife, shall bear thee a son indeed.
Isn't that encouraging?
Remember, who's speaking?
El Shaddai, the Almighty God.
He says, Abraham, Sarah, thy wife, shall bear thee a son indeed, and thou shalt call his
name Isaac.
And I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant and with his seed
after him.
To the plea of Abraham and the cry in verse 18, oh, that Ishmael might live before thee,
God repeats the promise that he's made, and he says, Sarah, thy wife, shall bear thee
a son indeed.
His name shall be Isaac.
And it's through him that I will establish my covenant, which is an everlasting covenant.
We find that this would come to pass in Genesis 22.
In fact, if you turn just a few pages over, excuse me, Genesis chapter 21, if you turn
over just a few pages, you find the Bible says in verse number one of Genesis 21, and
the Lord visited Sarah, notice these next words, as he had said.
And the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken.
You know, God always does what he says he will do.
God's never going to fail you.
He always does what he says he will do.
We find that it came to pass in Genesis chapter 21.
Notice in verse number 20, back in Genesis chapter number 17.
I love how God says this in verse number 20, and as for Ishmael, we find that it's
Abraham that would cry and plead to God in verse 18, oh, that Ishmael might live before
thee.
And God will give the answer with regard to the birth of Isaac in verse 19.
But in verse number 20, he says, and as for Ishmael, notice what God says, I have heard
thee.
You understand that God hears us.
We say this often, but the reality is that there are times in our lives when maybe we
just kind of take these things for granted, or maybe they don't have as much of an impact
in our lives, but God hears us.
He says, I have heard thee, behold.
Notice what the Bible says with regard to Ishmael in verse number 20.
I have blessed him.
God says of Ishmael, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply
him exceedingly.
Twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.
That's what God says about Ishmael.
Abraham says, oh, that Ishmael might live before thee.
God says with regard to the covenant, it's Isaac, not Ishmael.
But I have heard thee, and as for Ishmael, I have blessed him, I will make him fruitful,
I will multiply him exceedingly, twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great
nation.
If you turn over to Genesis chapter number 25 and look at verses 12 through 16, you will
find the fulfillment of this prophecy as well.
The Bible tells us in Genesis chapter number 25, beginning in verse number 12, now these
are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar, the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid,
bear unto Abraham.
And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael by their names according to their generations.
The firstborn of Ishmael, Nebuchadnezzar, and Kedar, and Adbil, and Mibsam, and Mishmah,
and Duma, and Massah, Hedar, and Timah, Jator, Naphish, Kedemah.
These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names by their towns and by their castles.
What does it say?
Twelve princes according to their nations.
Is that not what God said in Genesis 17?
He says at the end of the verse, twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great
nation.
We find that God answers what Abraham pleads for, and he says it's not with regard to the
covenant, but I will bless him.
I have blessed him is what God says in verse number 20.
And once again in verse number 21, as we focus upon these promises that God gives, we find
that the attention once again returns to the covenant and to the seed of Abraham and Sarah,
that of Isaac.
Notice verse 21, but my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee
at this set time in the next year.
Don't you like the end of verse number 21, a specified time?
How precious this must have been to Abraham.
After waiting for 24 years, God up to this point, as many times as he has said to Abraham
that I will multiply thee, that I will give you a seed, God never specified a time until
right here in Genesis 17 in verse number 21.
And God says to Abraham that she, Sarah, shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.
You understand that as we study the scriptures that chapters 18 and 19 deal with Sodom and
Gomorrah, and we'll study those over the next couple of weeks, and you deal with Abraham
and Abimelech there in chapter 20, but it's in chapter 21 that you read about the birth
of Isaac.
And so as you would see the difference between chapters 16 and 17 being 13 years, at the
end of chapter 17 until the chapter 21, there's a year.
God says this is going to happen.
And I believe that it gave Abraham just great joy of having this specified time that God
was going to do this and God was going to bring to pass that which he had promised and
he specifies this time.
And then the Bible says in verse number 22, can you see with me what's happening?
Now think about Abraham as we'd start in verse number one of chapter 17 and go down to verse
22.
And I want you to think about Abraham.
For 13 years, as best we know, biblically speaking, there's no time in which God spoke
to Abraham for these 13 years.
And then suddenly on a certain day, God appears to Abraham as we find in verse number one
when the Bible speaks of the age of Abraham and it says, the Lord appeared to Abram and
said unto him, I am the almighty God.
And then in verse number 22, it says, and he left off talking with him and God went
up from Abraham.
God came, he spoke, and then he departed.
And we find that Abraham is there left with these great promises that God almighty had
spoken to him.
These I wills, these declarative statements that the Lord God almighty said, I will do
this, and I will do that, and here's what I'm going to do, and here's how I'm going
to do, and here's the token of the covenant, and here's the instruction.
And Abraham has that moment of laughter in verse 17 and 18 when he says, shall a child
be born unto him that is a hundred years old, and shall Sarah that is ninety years old bear?
And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live, and God repeats the promises.
We find that then God went up from Abraham, and Abraham's left there.
And I would say this, it's a moment of decision.
Abraham, what are you going to do?
What are you going to do with what you've heard?
God appeared to you.
God said these things.
God gave you this instruction.
And we find, as we close this evening, if you're taking notes, number four, we looked
at number one, the plan, number two, the plea, number three, the promises, number four, the
obedience.
I know it's not a P, but that's okay.
The obedience of Abraham.
Notice in verse 23, it says this, and Abraham took Ishmael, his son, and all that were born
in his house and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's
house.
Now, just pause there for a moment because you'll understand that as we look at the passage
of Scripture and see all that is taking place, that you'll recall with me that when Abraham
dealt with the situation when his nephew Lot was taken captive in that war that was mentioned
in Genesis 14 that we studied, the Bible tells us in verse number 14 of Genesis 14 that when
Abraham heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his
own house, 318, and pursued them unto Dan.
Now, a number of years has passed.
No doubt some have died, but some have been born.
We don't know the exact number.
We know that God said that those that are born in your house and those that are bought
with thy money, according to verses 12 and 13, when we answered the question who is to
be circumcised, we find now that Abraham, according to verse number 23, that he took
Ishmael, his son, all that were born in his house, all that were bought with his money,
every male among the men of Abraham's house.
Now, can you imagine Abraham going and gathering everybody up?
And it says this at the end of the verse, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin
in the self same day as God had said unto him.
I want you to notice that phrase when it says in the self same day.
You know what that is?
That's immediate obedience.
Abraham obeyed the Lord.
We find that obedience is a demonstration of our faith in God.
Trust and obey.
We have faith in what God has said, and we obey Him.
The taking God at His word, the faith, and then the obedience that we find here that
is revealed through the action of Abraham.
And it says in the self same day, some have said, and I believe that it's worth repeating
that delayed obedience is disobedience.
Not now, but at some convenient time, at some other time, in some other place, in whatever
the circumstances might be.
But we find that Abraham, as he heard the message of God, and even after he had that
moment in verses 17 and 18 when he cries out before God, and God once again graciously
says no Abraham, here is the plan, here are my promises, that Abraham responds in obedience.
It says in verse number 24, Abraham was 90 years old and nine when he was circumcised
in the flesh of his foreskin, and Ishmael his son was 13 years old when he was circumcised
in the flesh of his foreskin.
In the self same day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son, and all the men of his
house born in the house and bought with money of the stranger were circumcised with him.
This obedience of Abraham that we find in this passage of Scripture, and we'd understand
that as we would look at the Scriptures and we'd understand here this token of circumcision,
this token of the covenant that it revealed, remember, it came after the declaration when
God said that he believed in the Lord and he counted it to him for righteousness.
But here was the outworking of Abraham's faith seen through the obedience, this action
that is taken in verses 23 through 27, and we'd find for us this evening the book of
Hebrews in chapter number 8 deals with a better covenant.
I preached a passage of Scripture there in Hebrews chapter number 8 last year, a message
from that passage dealing with the subject matter of a better covenant, and it's interesting
as you look throughout the Old Testament, you'd understand the way in which God would
talk about circumcising your heart, the circumcision of the heart.
We think about this new covenant or the better covenant, we'd understand that as we would
see the covenant that's being spoken of there in particular with regard to Moses and the
law and what have you, not really with regard to this covenant that we're dealing with here,
but we're mindful this evening of this truth that is given to us in the book of Genesis
with regard to the response of Abraham and his obedience that is seen in verses 23 through
27.
And I wonder this evening, how quick are we to obey God?
You say, well, if God appeared to me like He appeared to Abraham, man, I'd obey God.
There's something interesting about that.
There was a man that died and went to hell, and the book of Luke gives us the account,
and he said that he desired some water, and we're told that Lazarus could not pass to
that rich man.
There was a great gulf fixed between them, and the desire of the rich man that was in
hell was that Lazarus would go back to his house and tell his brethren, he had five brothers.
You know what the Bible tells us?
They have Moses and the prophets.
You know what he's saying?
They have the Word of God.
If they won't believe the Word of God, they're not going to believe, though one be raised
from the dead.
That's what the passage tells us.
So for those that would say, well, if God would appear to me like He appeared to Abraham,
then I'd obey.
I'd say to you in the words of Scripture that God gives us there in Luke chapter number
16.
If you want to go back and look at it, I just paraphrased through the passage.
If you're going to go back and read it, you'll see exactly that that's what happens.
And you'll not believe if you won't believe this book.
Because when we take this book as being the Word of God, as it is, remember the believers
in Thessalonica, they received it, what, the Word of God as it was in truth, being the
Word of God.
And when God speaks to us through His Word, how quick are we to obey?
How quick are we to do that which God has instructed us to do?
We understand, we say often from the book of James, that we're to be doers of the Word
and not hearers only.
Abraham's obedience at the end of Genesis chapter number 17 is on full display.
And you see that there, according to what we have in the pages of Scripture, there's
no discussion, no debating.
There's no, do we really have to do this?
Is this necessary?
This is going to be uncomfortable.
People aren't going to like it.
There's none of that that's recorded for us in the pages of Scripture.
But we find that Abraham obeyed and he did that which God had commanded him to do.
See God appeared to Abraham at the beginning of Genesis 17, I am the Lord God Almighty.
When we understand who He is, it helps us to understand what He's able to do, but it
also helps us to respond properly to what He commands, because we understand who He
is.
And I think sometimes, broadly speaking in Christendom, if I could use that term this
evening, that there's a small view of who God is.
There's a missing element amongst the believers today as to who God really is, and how holy,
and how mighty He is.
When God appears to Abraham in the way that He does in Genesis 17, 1, it helps Abraham
to understand that He's able to do that which He says He's going to do, because He first
reveals who He is, and then what He's going to do.
And when we understand who He is and what He's capable of doing, it also impacts how
I respond to Him, because He's God, He's the Almighty God.
We understand the New Testament truth with regard to, we're bought with a price, so we
truly grasp that truth of the Scriptures.
It causes us to have a completely different perspective in life.
No longer will we roam this earth saying, it's my life, I get to do what I want to do.
No, no, I'm bought with a price.
Abraham's obedience is on full display, and I believe it's directly correlated to him
understanding who God is and what God said.
And this evening, oh, that God would help us to get a glimpse of who He really is.
He's revealed it to us in the pages of Scripture, but sometimes we don't really know who He
is because we don't spend enough time in this book, and we're missing what God wants us
to know.
And the Lord God Almighty, He says, thy name shall be called Abraham.
And He reaffirms this great covenant that we speak so often, biblically, throughout
the pages of Scripture, you see so many references to these truths.
The seed, the land, repeated often, and in just a few weeks, we'll be able to see the
fulfillment of this promise with the birth of Isaac.
Let's pray.
Father, we love You.
Thank You for loving us.
Thank You for revealing who You are in Your Word.
I pray that You would help us to believe You, the promises that we can claim in the Scriptures
with regard to Your provision and Your protection in our lives.
Thank You that You are our shepherd.
You're a good shepherd, that as our shepherd, You care, You provide, You lead, You protect.
Help us to be mindful, as Abraham was in this passage, of who You really are and what You're
capable of doing.
Help us, Lord, as we open the pages of Scripture and are confronted with direction that You
would provide, commandments that You would give.
Would You help us to live a life of obedience?
Would You help us to truly say, I surrender all and my life is Yours to control.
I'll do what You want me to do.
I'll go where You want me to go.
I'll say what You want me to say.
Thank You for Your Word.
Thank You for the example of Abraham.
I pray, God, that You'd have Your will in the lives of Your people, and we'll thank
You for what You'll do.
For it's in Christ's name we pray.
Would You stand with me?